---
title: 'A computational understanding of Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP)'
date: 2022-11-05
permalink: /posts/2022/11/umap/
tags:
  - manifold learning
  - dimensionality reduction
  - high-dimensional systems
---

Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) is a nonlinear dimensionality reduction technique developed by McIness et al. in [2018](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1802.03426.pdf). Though its use is often called into question in the biological sciences, it has become a key visualization tool for many computational biologists wanting to tease apart important differences between cellular transcription or genetic profiles. While UMAP has been widely adopted as the state-of-the-art in nonlinear dimensionality reduction, it is often poorly understood by its users, leading to its misuse. The difficulty in understanding UMAP is in part due to the tremendous effort by the original authors in exposing mathematical ideas that ground UMAP as the first graph-based approach with theoretical understanding of its functionality. The authors use ideas from Riemannian geometry and algebraic topology to construct the theoretical framework on which UMAP is built. It is then good news that UMAP can be thoroughly understood from an entirely computational perspective.  

This post will be a guide through UMAP from the perspective of a computational scientist. We will explore thoroughly the key steps involved in the exceedingly popular nonlinear dimensionality reduction technique and even use the popular Python programming language to compute the embedding. 

### The dataset
 